= {$Page_DisplayName} =
=== Powered by !SimCraft {$Current_SimCraftRevision} ===

----

===Disclaimer===

One, who wants to fully comprehend results of this post and use them as valid arguments in the constructive discussion, needs to perfectly understand what assumptions author implied when he wrote the post.

 * To mine data for this project OP uses a specially developed application, [http://code.google.com/p/simulationcraft SimulationCraft], that models raid performance and synergies. With all the benefits of swift and convenient simulations give to the researcher !SimCraft might have bugs that distort simulation results. Nevertheless, development team believes that extensive testing on our boards allows to eliminate major defects that might severely affect correctness of its results, but OP still doesn't exclude possible errors that minorly affect the results.

 * Another peculiarity of !SimCraft is its nature. Where theorycraft must reduce a complex interaction into abstractions representing (sometimes loosely) the original behaviour, simulation simply models the actual behaviour. However, simulation may return return different accurate results depending upon the number and type of random events, such as resists and crits. This means that results present below have some (small, but existent) disparity with modelled real world characteristics. Sometimes it's less relevant (e.g. for dps and sustainability tests), sometimes - more relevant (e.g for scaling tests). Every time it's important, author will explicitly state guaranteed precision and interpretation of presented results.

To put it in a nutshell, !SimCraft is a very powerful application for modelling game mechanics. It provides highly configurable, easy to adjust and quite swift tool that a researcher can really enjoy. However, as every tool it has its limitations, that one needs to keep in mind when working with. 

Nevertheless, author considers yielded results to adequately describe parameters of in-game mechanics. Same goes for the entirety of www.shadowpriest.com that has been relying on !SimCraft gear evaluation results through all TBC (our [http://www.shadowpriest.com/viewtopic.php?f=14&t=9844 Best Raiding Gear Available (TBC) thread] approaches a monstrous number of 900k gets).

 * Surrogate gear sets used here are not intended to represent real world gears with 100% precision. Almost every spec is going to improve dps numbers by using alternative gear sets. This includes but is not limited to grabbing some spellhit gear, possibly swapping random epix to get preferred stats and maybe fulfilling tier set bonuses. And certainly, this set is not perfectly optimized for mana regeneration purposes - it features quite high amount of intellect, and is very low on spirit. However, all in all, used surrogate gearset provides a close to real world baseline that can be used to compare different caster specs and get results that are close to real world ones.

 * Same goes for raid composition that is used for running tests. However, due to recent raid stacking changes, that's not much of a problem. This research features quite common setup of raid buffs and raid target debuffs that's quite easily achievable in most cases.

 * Final notes will comment on specs and casting strategies featured by the research. Author is perfectly aware that there might exist some raid viable (and maybe even superior) caster specs and rotations that are not included in the test configuration. The reasons being author's oversight or recent patch changes that bring some specs to the table or completely destroy others, might influence simulation results. If you witness such problem, please, don't hesitate to post it in the [http://shadowpriest.com/viewtopic.php?f=54&t=16017 feedback thread] (posting requires you to be registered, registration is _free_).

In short, this research relies on some input data to work with - gear sets, specs and raid composition. Data chosen by author might not fit all the diversity of real world scenarios, but as time had shown it provides a steady baseline for making quite advanced analysis of game mechanics.

===Verification and feedback===

If you want to quickly reproduce tests listed below, follow [http://code.google.com/p/simulationcraft/wiki/HowToRun_Automation these instructions] (only Windows is supported at the moment).

If you have any feedback, clarifications, bug reports, please, post them at [http://shadowpriest.com/viewtopic.php?f=54&t=16017 the original topic at www.shadowpriest.com] (posting requires you to be registered, registration is _free_).

----

===Gear used for tests===

Gear used for scaling and sustainability tests:

{{{
{$Input_GearSets_Summary}
}}}

Comparative dps tests use three different gear sets:
 * Baseline mentioned above,
 * A "pimped" set with all stats but hit rating increased by 50%,
 * An "asymmetrically pimped" set with spellpower increased by 50%,and all other stats but hit rating increased by 100%.

===Raid composition, specs and casting strategies===

All tests use the same raid composition that simply puts all casters in the raid and lets them do some awesome DPS on Fluffy Pillow. Using [http://code.google.com/p/simulationcraft/wiki/HowToRun SimCraft notation], specs and casting strategies of casters present in the raid are as follows:

{{{
{$Input_SpecsAndActions_Summary}
}}}

----

===Note on mana regeneration===

Recently I've been receiving reports about heavy mana problems that caster specs experience on beta servers: when soloing, in 5-man instances and in 10/25-man raids. However this research shows that all caster specs outside of raids (with only personal means of manaregen) are supposed to experience downtime due to going OOM. 

That's why all test runs in this project are done with infinite_mana=0 parameter that makes players' mana bars to behave the same way as in reality - if a player is OOM, it will be forced to stand by and not dps, and this will be tracked by !SimCraft. To make sure that mana problems do not distort dps and scaling tests, below is presented raid downtime simulation results.

{$Research_ManaRegen_Downtime_Baseline}

===Caster specs' scaling===

Scaling with a certain stat was found by simulating baseline dps for the gear set described above, calculating dps with the stat increased by 200, and then dividing dps gain by 200 (to calculate scaling with spellhit, actual stat value is decreased by 200). Please, note that the data present here was acquired using iterations=1000 and has quite low precision (variation can be as high as 0.05). 

If you're unsure what's scaling or wonder about how it works, check [http://shadowpriest.com/viewtopic.php?f=13&t=16037 Scaling F.A.Q.] - a wall of text that in details describes basics of scaling and features loads of examples.

{$Research_Scaling_MainSpecs}

{$Research_Scaling_Mages}

{$Research_Scaling_Warlocks}

===Caster specs' dps===

{$Research_Dps_Baseline}

This test represents 50% increase for all stats on gear used above and literally capping hit%. I'd say it's almost an expansion-worth bunch of upgrades. Results nicely illustrate scaling trends of caster specs that are quite compliant to scaling graphs that were acquired above:

{$Research_Dps_Pimped_Symm}

The test below uses another strategy of augmenting baseline gear set - it favors combat ratings and raw stats in bigger fashion, and spellpower - in lesser. In my opinion, even in Sunwell of WotLK it would be barely possible to reach such stat values, but this gear set is valuable to the project because it exposes potential problems of scaling with combat ratings.

{$Research_Dps_Pimped_Asymm}

===Manaregen breakdown for a shadowpriest===

Gear used for this test is a surrogate set that consists of combined close-to-best-in-slot items from Naxx 10 (with almost capped spellhit). Raid composition is quite typical and features casters of all common specs and provides all common dps/manaregen-related raid buffs and target debuffs. More details above (section "Gear used for tests" and "Raid composition for tests").

In the spreadsheet below all Spirit-based regen enhancing effects including, but not limited to: Meditation, Improved Spirit Tap procs, Inner Focus deferring i5sr, Dispersion o5sr ticks, are baked into Spirit-based regen.

{$Research_ManaRegen_Shadowpriest}